hi guys welcome back if you're new here
my name is Michelle
I make SAT math videos so if you're
prepping for your SAT hit that subscribe
button okay today we're gonna be talking
about inequalities I love to teach
inequalities because I think they look a
little bit intimidating but you really
solve them just like any other equation
so if you know how to solve equations
you'll be fine with inequalities so the
basics sometimes people get confused
with the less-than and greater-than sign
I always teach this using pac-man think
about pac-man wanting to eat the bigger
number so in this case we see the
pac-man eating the 7 so we have the sign
facing the 7 the mouths open to the 7 so
4 is less than 7 right so let's walk
through when you have variables and it's
a little bit less tangible so the first
one is X is less than Y so you have the
Y being eaten by the pac-man so X is
less than Y is that first one the second
one is reversed so X is greater than Y
pac-man's eating X so X is greater than
Y when you have a less than sign with
that line under it it's less than or
equal to which basically means that the
number could be equal to that number or
greater than that number so in this
first one we have X pac-man to eating
the Y so X is less than or equal to Y so
X could be Y or any number less than Y
and the reverse is true so the thing to
remember here is sometimes the SAT uses
different wording so I'm going to write
the wording here so X is at most Y means
the same thing as X is less than Y so X
is at most Y I mean Y or anything less
in reverse they might use the wording X
is at least Y basically saying that X is
greater than or equal to Y so at least
the least amount that it could be is
starting at that Y so just become
familiar with those two terms because
they like to throw them into word
problems like I said earlier if you know
how to solve an equation you'll be fine
with solving inequalities so what's the
main difference well the difference is
when you solve an equation you get some
value for X or you get a few values for
X if you have quadratic with an
inequality your answer is a range you
get a range of numbers so if you get X
is equal to 3 front equation you might
get X is greater than 3
for the solution to an inequality and so
what does that mean if X is greater than
3 then X could be 4 5 6 X could be a
hundred a thousand right there's an
infinite number of solutions for that
one so let's take a look at an example
here we have X plus 9 is equal to 15 you
guys know this one you're just going to
subtract 9 from both sides and you get X
is equal to 6
one solution now let's look at an
inequality here we have X plus 9 is
greater than or equal to 15 so what
you're gonna do is you're gonna solve it
the same way you're gonna subtract 9
from both sides and you're gonna get X
and you're gonna bring that sign down X
is greater than or equal to 6
anytime you're solving in an inequality
I always say put it on a line graph
actually see it on a line so that you
can visualize the range so I'm going to
plot my point 6 I'm going to put a
darkened circle on 6 because it's
inclusive of 6 right X can be greater
than or equal to 6 so it could be 6 or
it could be more than 6 right so
there'll be 7 8 9 so my range goes in
this direction okay so it's one solution
versus a range when we're talking about
inequalities and equations so the most
important thing to remember the only
difference when you're solving an
equation in inequality is you're
actually going to flip the sign if you
multiply or divide by a negative that's
the only time you're flipping the sign
any other time if you're adding or
subtracting a negative you keep that
sign the same but if you multiply or
divide you flip the sign so let's look
at an example here we have o negative 11
is less than negative 6 X plus 1
so I'm going to get all my numbers to
one side my variables to the other how
do I do that
I must have tracked 1 from both sides
I'm going to get negative 11 plus a
negative 1 is negative 12 I'm gonna keep
the sign the same since I didn't
multiply or divide by negative minus 6x
now I want to isolate X so I'm going to
divide by a negative 6 so here it is we
divided by a negative number so negative
12 divided by negative 6 gives me a 2
and now I'm flipping
science so 2 is greater than X and in
order for me to visualize that range I'm
gonna put it on a number line I'm gonna
plot my point 2 here I get 3/4 give me
the positives what's on the other side
we have a 1 0 negative 1 negative 2 okay
so 2 is more than X so X has to be less
than 2 and can it be 2 notes I'm going
to do an open circle at 2 and any number
less so this entire range so it could be
negative 1 negative 3 does that make
sense hopefully so how do they actually
test this on the exam so a lot of the
times what you'll find is they'll test
inequalities by giving you two
inequalities in one line like they do
here so how do we read this well this is
negative 1 is less than X and then X is
also simultaneously less than or equal
to 2 I always recommend again drawing
that number line to visualize the range
so what do we see here so we have a
negative 1 and we know X has to be more
than negative 1 so I'm going to do an
open circle at negative 1 because it
doesn't include negative 1 and X we
greater than negative 1 okay pause now X
has to also be less than or equal to 2
so it could be equal to 2 and less than
2 and that's how I find my range so your
a goal for these when you have two
inequalities in one line is to get X by
itself and get 2 endpoints so you can
see okay
X is in between these two numbers so
let's look at an example from a real SAT
of how they actually test this so here
we have if 0 is less than 3 X minus 2
which is less than 1 what is one
possible value for X so like I said you
want to get X in the middle and two
endpoints nothing else next to that X so
here I unfortunately have a 3x and a
minus 2 so let's get rid of that -2
first how do you do that well basically
you're going to add 2 to each of the
numbers both on both sides so if I add 2
I get 0 plus 2 which is 2 is less than
3x which is less than 1 plus 2 which is
3 now I want to get rid of the 3 next to
the X so I have to divide 3 out but when
I divide 3 I'm going to do it by each of
the numbers so I get 2/3 is less than X
is less than 1 let's plot it to
visualize that ring
so I have 2/3 so X has to be more than
2/3 but it has to be less than 1 so what
number is between 2/3 and 1
well 2/3 is really 0.6 666 if you don't
know that you should know that 1/3 is
0.33 3 so then 2/3 is 0.33 times 2 which
is 0.666
so now my number is has to be between
point 666 and one well I know point 7 is
in between that and 0.7 can be
re-written as 7 over 10 so 7 over 10 is
one possible value of x 8 / 10 would be
another one okay let's look at another
one so here we are given if n can be any
integer such that 6 is less than the
square root of n which is less than 10
what is the difference between the
largest possible value of N and the
smallest possible value for n so here
first of all we're not looking for just
n we're looking for the the highest
possible value of n and the lowest
possible value of N and then we want to
subtract them so it's the first things
first don't circle N and we're given
that square root here which makes it a
little bit more complicated so on this
side I'm gonna say if I were to tell you
find n if you are if you have this
equation the square root of n is equal
to 10 what would you do well you would
square both sides in order to get n by
itself without that square root right so
then you get n is equal to 100 same
thing here we're gonna square that
square root of n we're going to square
the two endpoints in order to just get
what are the possible values of n so if
I square the square root of and I just
get n if I square 6 and I square 10 I
get 36 is less than n which is less than
a hundred so now I know that my possible
values of n are between 36 and 100 but
because we have less than signs without
equal to we know that they are not
inclusive of 36 and 100 so my number huh
could be 37 all the way up to 99 right
so my largest possible value is 99 then
and my smallest possible value is 37 so
if you subtract 99 from 37 we got 62 and
our answers D so a lot of work here
basically if you get really good at
solving equations you'll get really good
at solving inequalities because you're
kind of using the same method
but you're just rewriting a different
science so instead of an equal sign in
all these places we kind of have that
inequality sign and what you do to one
side you kind of do it the other so
you're simultaneously solving two
equations let's look at one more here
where we only have one inequality right
so we're being given if the inequality
above is true for the constant a which
of the following could be the value of x
so I'm looking for X so all right I'm
going to try to isolate X just like I do
with any other equation so I'm going to
rewrite 6x plus 3 is greater than or
equal to a so I'm going to subtract 3
from both sides I get 6x is greater than
or equal to a minus 3 great now I'm
going to divide the whole thing by 6
because I want X by itself and I get X
is greater than remember when you divide
something like this with subtraction you
have to divide each term by 6 so you get
a over 6 minus 3 over 6 so X is really
bigger than some number a over 6 minus
1/2 so which are the following answer
choices are bigger than a over 6 minus
1/2 just think of a / 6s some any random
number let's say it's Y so X is greater
than Y minus 1/2 which of these is
bigger than that well I see that a is
basically just that number Y well we
know that the number Y or a over 6 is
always going to be bigger than a / 6
subtracted by something right a / 6
subtracted by something is going to be
smaller and if you look at B and C
you're subtracting a bigger number than
1/2 from those so you know those are
wrong right because negative 1 you're
subtracting more right minus 1 instead
of minus 1/2 minus 3 instead of minus in
half so in this case your answer choice
is a because a / 6 is bigger than a over
6 minus 1/2 right okay that's all I have
for inequalities
that's a lot right but basically like I
said earlier if you know how to solve an
equation you know how to solve an
equality be very very careful when you
multiply and divide by a negative make
sure you flip that side and if you're
working with that one line with two
inequalities just think about X being in
between two endpoints to get X by itself
by just doing the operations to both
endpoints hope you guys got that I'm
gonna have plenty of more videos if you
have any other topics that you would
like me to go over please comment down
below I'm gonna take a look at the
comments and make sure that I'm
structuring my lessons to what you guys
want to learn and good luck study study
study bye guys